\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename hqn.info
@settitle Harlequeen geodata server
@c For double-sided printing, uncomment:
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@c Put everything in one index (arbitrarily chosen to be the concept index).

@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex tp cp
@synindex pg cp
@c %**end of header

@include version.texi
@set BUGADDR the Libtool bug reporting address @email{bug-hqn@@harley.bs}
@set MAILLIST the Libtool mailing list @email{hqn@@harley.bs}

@copying
This manual is for Harlequeen geodata server (eq hqn) (version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}).

Copyright @copyright{} 2016 Harley Kooper

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts,
and with no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in
the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.

@end copying

@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* Hqn: (hqn).           GIS server w/ client.
@end direntry

@dircategory Group servers
@direntry
* harlequin: (harlequin)Invoking libtool. Running the server.
* hqnclient: (hqnclient)Invoking hqnclient.  Running remote client.
@end direntry


@titlepage
@title HQN server description
@subtitle For version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Harley Kooper

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage


@c Output the table of contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Harlequeen geodata server (eq hqn)

This is document contains all documents about hqn. Only this document can (and has to) be used for settings, tuning and working with one.

@menu
* Introduction::    The Introduction is the only chapter in this sample.
* Technical description:: What is it and how does it work?
* Installation:: 	Installation manual.
* Configuration::   Server configuration
* Client access:: 	Client access description (IMPORTANT)                       
* Qlang::    		The QLANG description.
* Index::           Complete index.

@detailmenu

Introduction
Technical description
* Common::  In common.
* Hub::    		About 'hub'
* Service::		About 'service'
* Bind::	About 'bind'.

Installation
* Requirements::    		What I have to have?
* Build from src::			Alas! Nothig other.
* Properley installation::	How to it wiil installed and works.
* Postinstall::             What else.

Configuration
* Core::  Core configuration.
* Store::  Store configuration.
* Hubserver::  Receivers configuration
* Services::	Transmitters configuration
* Binders::	Binders configuration

Client access
Qlang
* Do::     Who is 'do'
* What::   What is this.
* When::   What is this.
* Filter::   What is this.
* Order::   What is this.
* Format::  What is this.
* Params::  What is this.
Index

@end detailmenu
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@c =========================  Introduction ====================================
@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@cindex chapter, first


@cindex HQN - open source software for receive GIS
HQN - open source software for receive GIS (include all navigation, fuel sensors, CAN data and so on) data, temprorary storing and retranslation
ones to variable destinations. Now hqn can receive next data formats:
@enumerate
@item
wialon-retranslator
@item
egts v1.7 (russia)
@item
ndtp v1.6
@end enumerate

Now hqn can deliver data to:
@enumerate
@item
postgresql database
@item
rabbitmq message broker
@item
RESTFull service as json stream
@item
tcp port as wialon-retranslator stream (egts in plans)
@end enumerate
Also you can export data to file.

@b{HQN} doesn't change any received data, hold and retransmitted ones "as is" exclude between protocol/database/(to/from)string transformations. 
All times inside HQN at UTC, unit's times as received from unit's. In that configuration @b{HQN} requires @copyright{} Postgresql server and @code{libpqxx}.

You can use @b{HQN} as GIS service w/ listed above features, also you can use it as traffic fork service only. In that configuration you have only somethng 
logs about wet traffic retranslation.

@c =========================  Technical description ====================================
@node Technical description
@chapter Technical description
@cindex chapter, first


@cindex Technical description of HQN - open source software for receive GIS
Technical description here. Main things:
@menu
* Common::  In common.
* Hub::    		About 'hub'
* Service::		About 'service'
* Bind::	About 'bind'.
@end menu
 
@c -------------  TD Common -------------------------------
@node Common
@c ................
@section Common 
@cindex Common to Technical description


@c -------------  TD Hub -------------------------------
@node Hub
@c ................
@section Hub 
@cindex Hub to Technical description

@c -------------  TD Service -------------------------------
@node Service
@c ................
@section Service 
@cindex Service to Technical description

@c -------------  TD Bind -------------------------------
@node Bind
@c ................
@section Bind 
@cindex Bind to Technical description

@c ======================= Installation ======================================
@node Installation
@c ................
@chapter Installation

@cindex chapter, first

It's wrote with g++ (version c++11) over x86_64 CentOS7/RHEL7.2/Fedora 24
There's NOT TESTED at ANY OTHER distribs and/or platforms. You can obtain and do it youself.
If someone does not like it -  ure welcome.

@menu
* Requirements::    		What I have to have?
* Build from src::			Alas! Nothig other.
* Properley installation::	How to it wiil installed and works.
* Postinstall::             What else.
@end menu

@c -------------  Requirements -------------------------------
@node Requirements
@c ................
@section Requirements to install
@cindex Requirements to install

@enumerate
@item
Common: 
	@enumerate
	@item
		gcc/g++ && libs, 
	@item
		libtools, 
	@item
		automake, 
	@item
		cmake (need to build rabbitmq-c, if you've got librabbitmq.a 64-bit then put it to tools/lib64), 
	@item
		openssl
	@end enumerate
@item
  libtecla (inside, need to build it)
@item
  POCO complete edition (@url{http://pocoproject.org/download/index.html})
  @example
  ./configure --prefix=/usr --omit=Data/ODBC,Data/MySQL --shared
  @end example
@end enumerate

If you want obtain full functional @b{HQN} you need to nave also:
@enumerate
@item
Postgresql server, something up from 9.3
@item
GNU libgcrypt
@item
Optional. rabbitmq-c (inside, will built by autogen, but it can manually)
@end enumerate
Postgresql must be installed locally. If you won't to use Rabbitmq connections you can built @b{HQN} w/o rabbit option.

@b{NOTE}: 

Pre-built supplies includes Postgresql and Rabbbitmq support if other doesn’t pointed package/archive name. 

@c --------------------  Build from src ------------------------
@node Build from src
@c ................
@section Build from src
@cindex Build from src
Preffered directory structure (cloned from git must be the same):
@example
   BUILD_ROOT  
             ...
             .gitmodules
             ...
             harlequind          @kbd{- hqn here},
                        ...
                        client ->   @kbd{- client sources (and binaries wiil here)}
                        daemon ->   @kbd{- server sources (and binaries wiil here)}
                        docs/hqn -> @kbd{- this text}
                        ...
             libtecla
             rabbitmq-c     @kbd{- subrepo, link to clone inside .gitmodules}
             tools          @kbd{- some prebuilt libraries and headers}
                  ...
                  include->  @kbd{headers of prebuilt software }
                  lib ->     @kbd{some prebuilt 32b-libraries }
                  lib64 ->   @kbd{some prebuilt 64b-libraries }
                  ...
@end example
BUILD_ROOT has to change to real path. Inside the BUILD_ROOT exists @code{autogen.sh} and  @code{configure} script. You can use last with a special keys:
@enumerate
@item
If you want use full-featured build (@b{with} RabbitMQ)
@example
configure ... --enable-postgresql
@end example
@item
If you want use full-featured @b{without} RabbitMQ
@example
configure ... --enable-postgresql --disable-rabbitmq
@end example
@item
If you want use "fork-type" build (@b{without both} Postgresql and RabbitMQ)
@example
configure ... 
@end example
@end enumerate
Other @code{configure} opthions (@code{--prefix} ant so on) are normal.

Next steps:
@enumerate
@item
Now go to @code{BUILD_ROOT/harlequind} and make it:
	@example
	./autogen
	make && sudo make install
	@end example
If you won't use  @code{autogen.sh}, lose this point and go further.

@item
build && install POCO into /usr by:
@example
	cd $POCO
	./configure --prefix=/usr --omit=Data/MySQL,Data/ODBC --shared
	./make -j4 && make install
@end example
	
@item
@command{export PREFIX=BUILD_ROOT/tools} 

@item
If w/o  @code{autogen.sh } build && install libtecla (cd inside of BUILD_ROOT/libtecla and run):
@example
	./configure --prefix=$PREFIX
	make && make install
@end example
	
@item
	Install @code{libgcrypt} w/ devel by pkg manager 
@item
	If @b{with} Postgresql you need libpqxx by (@command{wget} from @url{http://www.andromeda.nl/UNIX/packages/} 
	or @url{http://pqxx.org/development/libpqxx/}) manually.	
	@b{NOTE}: check your Postgresql installation:  @code{/usr/lib/libpq.so/a} has to exists, else do something this:
	@example
	sudo ln -s /usr/pgsql-9.5/lib/libpq.so.5 /usr/lib/libpq.so
	@end example
	Your installation can hasn't @code{so.5}, but has any another - it doesn't matter. The sames about static (.a) library.
	
@item
If w/o  @code{autogen.sh } now go to @code{BUILD_ROOT/harlequind} and make it:
	@example
	make && sudo make install
	@end example

@end enumerate


@c --------------------------------------------
@node Properley installation
@c ................
@section Properley installation
@cindex Properley installation
Properley installation - it's about postgresql. 

@c --------------------------------------------
@node Postinstall
@c ................
@section Postinstall
@cindex Postinstall
Nothing to do with HQN w/o SSL certificates. Any access by @code{hqnclient} require client's certificate. You can do it by next steps: 

@enumerate
@item
Create own CA or use bought.
@item
Create server certificate, signed by CA from prev point. Or use bought.
@item
Server certificate, signed by CA from prev point. Create own or use bought.
@item
Create client's key and CSR, create certificate signed by server certificate (not CA, but in your choice) certificate. 

@end enumerate

If you want use own SSL infrastructure:
@enumerate
@item
Generate password encrypted root CA key:
@example
	openssl genrsa -des3 -out rootCA.key 2048
@end example
@item
Create self-signed certificate:
@example
	openssl req -x509 -new -nodes -key rootCA.key -sha256 -days 1024 -out rootCA.pem
@end example
@item
Ship pem to clients to add it into local trusted store by browser or manually (example for CentOs 6):
@example   
	sudo -s
	yum install ca-certificates
	update-ca-trust force-enable
	cp rootCA.pem /etc/pki/ca-trust/source/anchors/rootCA.crt
	update-ca-trust extract
@end example
@item
Server's certificates signed by this CA:
	@itemize @bullet
	@item
  	key:
	@example
	openssl genrsa -out device.key 2048
	@end example
	@item
  	certificate:
	@example
	openssl req -new -key device.key -out device.csr
	@end example
    it will require VALID ip address here (wrong ip will reject ssl request from @code{hqnclient}):
	@example	
	Common Name (eg, YOUR name) []: 10.0.0.1
	@end example
	@item
	sign it by CA:
	@example	
	openssl x509 -req -in device.csr -CA rootCA.pem -CAkey rootCA.key -CAcreateserial -out device.crt -days 500 -sha256
	@end example
	@end itemize
@item
Client's certificate (NOTE: too many passwords in proc, try use 1st always - less secured but more simple, it isn't banking system)
	@itemize @bullet
	@item
  	request creation (making by client):
	@example	
	openssl genrsa -des3 -out client.key 4096
	openssl req -new -key client.key -out client.csr
	@end example
	@item
  	then send csr to server admin, obtain signed:
	@example	
	openssl x509 -req -in client.csr -CA rootCA.pem -CAkey rootCA.key -CAcreateserial -out client.crt -days 365 -sha256
	@end example
	@item
  	[optional] convert client key to pkcs:
	@example	
	openssl pkcs12 -export -clcerts -in client.crt -inkey client.key -out client.p12
	@end example
	@item
  	[optional after 5.3] convert client key to pem:
	@example	
	openssl pkcs12 -in client.p12 -out client.pem -clcerts
	@end example
	@item
  	remove passfrase from key, secured key will store in other file:
	@example	
	cp client.key client.key.secure
  	openssl rsa -in client.key.secure -out client.key
	@end example
	@end itemize
@item
If you use a dh temp file :
	@example	
	openssl dhparam -outform PEM -out dh2048.pem 2048
	@end example
@item
Test ssl infrastructure:
	@example	
	openssl s_client -connect <host>:<port>
	@end example
@end enumerate
	
By default HQN hold configs at @code{/etc/hqn}. Put @code{hqn.xml} here. Keystore lives nextdoor:  @code{/etc/hqn/.keystore}. 
Put here CA (if you didn't set it to @code{ca-certificates}) and server's key and certificate. 
	
	
@c ======================= Configuration ======================================
@node Configuration
@c ................
@chapter Configuration
@cindex chapter, first
By default HQN hold configs at @code{/etc/hqn}. Put @code{hqn.xml} here.

@menu
* Core::  Core configuration.
* Store::  Store configuration.
* Hubserver::  Receivers configuration
* Services::	Transmitters configuration
* Binders::	Binders configuration
@end menu

@c -------------  Configuration Core -------------------------------
@node Core
@c ................
@section Core 
@cindex Core to configuration

@c -------------  Configuration Store -------------------------------
@node Store
@c ................
@section Store 
@cindex Store to configuration

@c -------------  Configuration Hubserver -------------------------------
@node Hubserver
@c ................
@section Hubserver 
@cindex Hubserver to configuration

@c ------------- Configuration Services -------------------------------
@node Services
@c ................
@section Services 
@cindex Services to configuration

@c -------------  Configuration Binders -------------------------------
@node Binders
@c ................
@section Binders 
@cindex Binders to configuration



@c ======================= Client access ======================================
@node Client access
@c ................
@chapter Client access
@cindex chapter, first
HQN use @b{hqnclient} for access to server. It works over TLS1.2 only and first of all, client must obtain certificate from server administrator. 
If you're an administrator and want first time connected, you must create your own certificate for those e-mail that you define at @code{mailto} of @kbd{<smtp>} tag in @b{hqn.xml}.
You need @command{openssl} and about 5 minutes. @xref{Postinstall,, Postinstall}. Client's e-mail included as @code{<member>} in some @code{<account>} means only configured, but doensn't active and enabled.
If client obtain certificate it means that his account at server active and enabled only.  
Client has to put certificate (and private key) to @code{$HOME/.hqn/.ks/}. It has to be pair of .crt and .key or single .pem file per registered e-mail. 
If you removed private key's passfrase then reccomended to store new key in separate .key file and to move .pem in .crt that produce pair against single with passfrase.
If you held private key's passfrase then you will asked about one and passfrase @b{will showed at input time}. It isn't bug, it was lazy to fix it and wiil hided in future versions.


@c ====================== Qlang =======================================
@node Qlang
@c ................
@chapter Qlang
@cindex chapter, first


Here is about Q[ery]LANG[uage].

Because HQN doesn't claim to analytical podium, QLANG has only reference and control purpose. It isn't language at common mean.  Global pattern is:

@example
do[
	.what([params])[
		.when([params])[
			.filter([params])[
				.order([params])[
					.format([params])
				]
			]
		]
	]
];
@end example

where @kbd{'param'} - string of comma-separated parameters for 'what'. Parameters are positional and nonamed. Types of parameters:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{string}: double quated string, for ex @kbd{"what can i do"};
@item
@code{integer}: signed/unsigned integer, for ex @kbd{54123};
@item
@code{double}: signed/unsigned dot devided float point value, for ex @kbd{-25.674};
@item
@code{boolean}: @kbd{true/false} w/o double quates;
@end itemize

Term @kbd{'do'} - it's command, defined by verb what server has to do. 
Each @kbd{'do'} has own list of @kbd{'what'}s.

Here and later word 'what' means anything included later @kbd{'do'}. In the project scope the 'what' related not only to first element after @kbd{'do'} but to each. 
Nevertheless only first of them has name @kbd{what}. In this way all this: what, when, filter, order, format - "what", but only first has name @kbd{'what'}. 
Each @kbd{'what'} can get parameter string, but some @kbd{'what'}s has to has parameter(s). They're marked as not nulled later. 
Email for example does not make any sense without value, but json-format under @kbd{selec}t doesn't need any because has got default (utf-8) encoding. 

@menu
* Do::     (@kbd{'do'}) - what you want to do: set, open, close, select, export etc
* What::   (@kbd{'what'})- what you need in @kbd{'do'}. It relate to @kbd{'do'}.
* When::  (@kbd{'when'}) - when you need in @kbd{'do'}. It relate to @kbd{'do'} from @kbd{'what'} at the time mean.
* Filter:: (@kbd{'filter'}) - filter of data you need in @kbd{'do'}. It relate to @kbd{'do'} from @kbd{'when'} at the object (vehicle for ex) filter mean. 
* Order::  (@kbd{'order'}) - which order of data you need in @kbd{'do'}. It relate to @kbd{'do'} from @kbd{'filter'} at the object's order mean. 
* Format:: (@kbd{'format'}) - which format of output you need in @kbd{'do'}. It relate to @kbd{'do'} from @kbd{'order'} at the human readable format mean.
* Params::  - string of comma-separated parameters for some 'what'.
@end menu

On the basis of the above the order of operations has to be only this: do->what->when->filter->order->format. 
You can't change order of things, but can exclude any. Then will used default value: all for when, ascending for order, empty for filter and one-header table format.  

@c --------------------------------------------
@node Do
@c ................
@section Do
@cindex chapter, first
Term @kbd{'do'} - it's command, defined by verb what server has to do. Each @kbd{'do'} has own list of @kbd{'what'}s. 
List of @kbd{'do'}-es with according @kbd{'what'}s:
@enumerate
@item @anchor{do-set}
	@kbd{set} - set session parameters. @xref{what-email,, @kbd{'email'}}.
@item @anchor{do-account}
	@kbd{account} - account administration options.  @xref{what-add,, @kbd{'add'}}, @xref{what-rm,, @kbd{'rm'}}, @xref{what-chg,, @kbd{'chg'}}.
@item @anchor{do-hub}
	@kbd{hub} - @b{Server admin} feature - hub administration options.  @xref{what-start,, @kbd{'start'}}, @xref{what-stop,, @kbd{'stop'}}, @xref{what-restart,, @kbd{'restart'}}, 
	@xref{what-snooze,, @kbd{'snooze'}}, @xref{what-kick,, @kbd{'kick'}}, @xref{what-status,, @kbd{'status'}}.
@item @anchor{do-fork}
	@kbd{fork} - @b{Server admin} feature - fork administration options.  @xref{what-start,, @kbd{'start'}}, @xref{what-stop,, @kbd{'stop'}}, @xref{what-restart,, @kbd{'restart'}},
	 @xref{what-snooze,, @kbd{'snooze'}}, @xref{what-kick,, @kbd{'kick'}}, @xref{what-status,, @kbd{'status'}}.
@item @anchor{do-service}
	@kbd{service} - @b{Server admin} feature - service administration options.  @xref{what-start,, @kbd{'start'}}, @xref{what-stop,, @kbd{'stop'}}, @xref{what-restart,, @kbd{'restart'}}, 
	@xref{what-snooze,, @kbd{'snooze'}}, @xref{what-kick,, @kbd{'kick'}}, @xref{what-status,, @kbd{'status'}}.
@item @anchor{do-bind}
	@kbd{bind} - @b{Server admin} feature - bind administration options.  @xref{what-start,, @kbd{'start'}}, @xref{what-stop,, @kbd{'stop'}}, @xref{what-restart,, @kbd{'restart'}}, 
	@xref{what-snooze,, @kbd{'snooze'}}, @xref{what-kick,, @kbd{'kick'}}, @xref{what-status,, @kbd{'status'}}.
@item @anchor{do-open}
	@kbd{open} - open resource: remote host or local file (for load content as scenary). @xref{what-host,, @kbd{'host'}},  @xref{what-file,, @kbd{'file'}}.
@item @anchor{do-list}
	@kbd{list} - statistical tool, lists of things: vehicles, untransmitted data, emails in account etc.
@item @anchor{do-close}
	@kbd{close} - close opened resource(s), still works. No whats.
@item @anchor{do-exit}
	@kbd{exit} - close opened resource(s), exit client. No whats.
@item @anchor{do-select}
	@kbd{select} - very rough analogue of SQL SELECT operator @xref{what-4select,, whats for it}.
@item @anchor{do-delete}
	@kbd{delete} - very rough analogue of SQL DELETE operator @xref{what-4select,, whats for it}, @pxref{what-delid,, @kbd{delid}}. Move data to @code{trash}. Recoverable.
@item @anchor{do-undo}
	@kbd{undo} - Recovers data from @code{trash}. NOTE: You MUST remember delete id or put the same operands as according @kbd{delete}.
@item @anchor{do-purge}
	@kbd{purge} - Remove all early deleted data - unrecoverable ones. No whats.
@item @anchor{do-export}
	@kbd{export} - the same @kbd{select} but output to file/URL.
@end enumerate


@c --------------------------------------------
@node What
@c ................
@section What
@cindex chapter, first
Term @kbd{'what'} - it's command extention means what according @kbd{'do'} has to do. Each @kbd{'what'} can get parameter string, but some @kbd{'what'}s 
 has to has parameter. Email for ex. They're marked as not nulled below.
@enumerate
@item @anchor{what-email}
	@kbd{email} - e-mail address of client's certificate wich will connect to server. 
		@xref{do-set,, @kbd{'set'}}. String parameter. Not null. 
	@example
	$ set.email("nobody@@nowhere.net");
	@end example
@item @anchor{what-host}
	@kbd{host} - remote address to connect, @xref{do-open,, @kbd{'open'}}. Parameters:
	@itemize @bullet
		@item
			@code{1st}: ip address/FQDN. String. Not null.
		@item
			@code{2nd}: port number. Integer. Default 54123
	@end itemize
	
@example
	$ open.host("10.2.5.8", 55468);
	$ open.host("10.2.5.9");
@end example
@item @anchor{what-file}
	@kbd{file} - file wich need for a work. @xref{do-open,, @kbd{'open'}}. String parameter. Not null.
	@example
	$ open.file("/tmp/some.file");
	@end example	
@item @anchor{what-add}
	@kbd{add} - add email and link to account. @xref{do-account,, @kbd{'account'}}. String parameter. Not null.	
	@example
	$ account.add("nobody@@nowhere.net");
	@end example	
@item @anchor{what-rm}
	@kbd{rm} - remove email and link to account. @xref{do-account,, @kbd{'account'}}. String parameter. Not null.	
	@example
	$ account.rm("nobody@@nowhere.net");
	@end example	
@item @anchor{what-chg}
	@kbd{chg} - change email w/ save it link to account. @xref{do-account,, @kbd{'account'}}. Double string parameters. Not null both.	
	@example
	$ account.chg("nobody-old@@nowhere.net", "nobody-new@@nowhere.net");
	@end example	
@item @anchor{what-delid}
	@kbd{delid} - delete id for undoing. @xref{do-undo,, @kbd{'undo'}},  @pxref{do-purge,, @kbd{'purge'}}. Integer. Not null.	
	@example
	$ delete.traffic()[additional option permits];
	Ok 123456
	$ undo.delid(123456);
	Ok
	$ delete.traffic()[additional option permits];
	Ok 123457
	$purge;
	Ok
	$ undo.delid(123457);
	No such id: 1234567
	@end example
	This will delete all traffic data, obtain delete id (123456), undo it, delete another, obtain next delete id (123457), remove this data 
	forever and try to restore ones unsuccessfully.	
@end enumerate
Next three @code{'what'} have equal mean with according @code{'do'}. @xref{do-hub,, @kbd{'hub'}},  @pxref{do-fork,, @kbd{'fork'}},  
				@pxref{do-service,, @kbd{'service'}},  @pxref{do-bind,, @kbd{'bind'}}. Ones named thing at the list:
@enumerate
@item @anchor{what-start}
	@kbd{start} - start thing if one stopped, nothing else. Will re-read config. For @code{server} starts all of resources according config.
@item @anchor{what-stop}
	@kbd{stop} - stop thing if one started, nothing else. Will closed all connections and over and commited all transactions.
@item @anchor{what-restart}
	@kbd{restart} - stop and start sequence.
@item @anchor{what-snooze}
	@kbd{snooze} - sleep only, do nothing, won't close connections but commit transactions. For short timed database operations. Doesn't re-read config.
	For @code{bind} it means snoozing of @code{service} as soon as one will transmit all from exists. 
	For @code{hub} or @code{fork} it means snoozing of chain(s) as soon as one will transmit all from exists.
@item @anchor{what-kick}
	@kbd{kick} - wakeup.
@item @anchor{what-status}
	@kbd{status} - thing's status 
@end enumerate
They're have one integer parameter - id of thing, exclude for @code{server}. -1 value means for all. Restart server:
@example
	$ hqn.restart();
@end example
Restart service #12:
@example
	$ service.restart(12);
@end example
Snooze hub #1:
@example
	$ hub.snooze(1);
@end example
Wake up all binds:
@example
	$ bind.kick(-1);
@end example
If you want change preferences of thing, you have to change @code{/etc/hqn/hqn.xml} and restart this thing only. Don't need to restart all server. 
You can't start snoozed thing or kick stopped one. These are have different appointments. 

@xref{do-select,, @kbd{'select'}}.  Only single @code{'what'} from below permitted for one: 
@anchor{what-4select}
@enumerate
@item @anchor{what-full}
@kbd{full} - all types of data listed below exclude @code{asstr}
@item @anchor{what-traffic}
@kbd{traffic} - traffic only ( lat, lon, speed, alt, heading, hdop, vdop, validity, position time etc)
@item @anchor{what-sensors}
@kbd{sensors} - any exists sensor's data
@item @anchor{what-inputs}
@kbd{inputs} - any exists input's data
@item @anchor{what-outputs}
@kbd{outputs} - any exists output's data
@item @anchor{what-can}
@kbd{can} - any exists data from CAN bus
@item @anchor{what-canlog}
@kbd{canlog} - any exists canlog data 
@item @anchor{what-events}
@kbd{events} - events (alarm, moving, parking etc)
@item @anchor{what-asstr}
@kbd{asstr} - all data as csv-like string
@end enumerate

This:
@example
	$ select.traffic()[additional option permits];
@end example	
will show all @code{traffic}-type data of this client.

This:
@example
	$ select.full().yesterday().veh(-1, 2450).asc().json();
@end example	
will show as json all data of this client for yesterday, vehicles id less than 2450, ordered ascending. 
What about @code{yesterday}, @code{veh}, @code{asc} and @code{json}?  @xref{When,, When}. @xref{Filter,, Filter}. @xref{Order,, Order}. @xref{Format,, Format}.  

@xref{do-list,, @kbd{'list'}}. Only single @code{'what'} from below permitted for one: 
@anchor{what-4list}
@enumerate
@item @anchor{what-emails}
@kbd{emails} - all emails in account
@item @anchor{what-vehs}
@kbd{vehs} - all vehicles in account w/ time of last data received
@item @anchor{what-untr}
@kbd{untr} - count of untransmitted data group by vehicles, by dates and total
@item @anchor{what-tr}
@kbd{tr} - count of transmitted data group by vehicles, by dates and total
@item @anchor{what-info}
@kbd{info} - total account info: emails, vehicles, sessions etc
@end enumerate

This:
@example
	$ list.vehs();
@end example	
shows all vehicles in account w/ time of last data received.

@c --------------------------------------------
@node When
@c ................
@section When
@cindex chapter, first
Term @kbd{'when'} - it's command extention means what time slot according @kbd{'what'} has to do. Each @kbd{'when'} can get parameter string, but some @kbd{'when'}s 
 has to has parameter. They're marked as not nulled below. There're @kbd{'when'}'s according time when data received:
@enumerate
@item @anchor{what-all}
@kbd{all} - All data. No parameters.
@item @anchor{what-today}
@kbd{today} - Today received data. All data. No parameters.
@item @anchor{what-yesterday}
@kbd{yesterday} - Yesterday received data. All data. No parameters.
@item @anchor{what-week}
@kbd{week} - Last week received data. All data. No parameters.
@item @anchor{what-between}
@kbd{between} - From date to date (exclude both) received data. Two integer parameters: seconds UTC. Not nulled. 
				If parameter == -1, it means less than least or great than greatest. See examples below.
This:
@example
	$ select.full().beween(-1, 1474339340);
@end example	
shows all vehicles in account w/ received time less than 02:42:20 2016-09-20 UTC (until 02:42:19 inc.).
@example
	$ select.full().beween( 1474339340, -1);
@end example	
shows all vehicles in account w/ received time great than 02:42:20 2016-09-20 UTC (from 02:42:21 inc.).
@example
	$ select.full().beween( 1474332140, 1474339340);
@end example	
shows all vehicles in account w/ received time great than 00:42:20 and 02:42:20 2016-09-20 UTC (included from 00:42:21 to 02:42:19).

Zero value instead -1 permits, of course, but HQN use unsigned times and 0 will considered as value and built double sided request ( 0 < x < greatest) 
whereas -1 built one sided ( x < greatest for ex).
@end enumerate

For event time (gps timestamp inside @kbd{traffic}) operations add '_u' to end of @kbd{'when'}:
@enumerate
@item @anchor{what-all_u}
@kbd{all_u} - @b{Default}. All data. No parameters.
@item @anchor{what-todayu}
@kbd{today_u} - Today events data. All data. No parameters.
@item @anchor{what-yesterdayu}
@kbd{yesterday_u} - Yesterday enents data. All data. No parameters.
@item @anchor{what-week_u}
@kbd{week_u} - Last week events data. All data. No parameters.
@item @anchor{what-between_u}
@kbd{between_u} - From date to date (exclude both) events data. Two integer parameters: seconds at unit timezone. Not nulled. It hasn't to be UTC. 
				If parameter == -1, it means less than least or great than greatest. See examples above.
@end enumerate

@c --------------------------------------------
@node Filter
@c ................
@section Filter
@cindex chapter, first
Term @kbd{'filter'} - it's command extention means things filter according @kbd{'when'} has to do. Each @kbd{'filter'} can get parameter string, but some @kbd{'filter'}s 
 has to has parameter. They're marked as not nulled below. There're @kbd{'filter'}'s:
@enumerate
@item @anchor{filter-all}
@kbd{all} - @b{Default}. All data. No parameters.
@item @anchor{filter-valid}
@kbd{valid} - only valid traffic (LAT/LON w/ validity = parameter, default @b{true}). Nullable
@example
	$ select.full().all().valid(false);
@end example	
shows all vehicles w/ invalid coordinates.
@example
	$ select.full().all().valid();
@end example	
shows all vehicles w/ valid coordinates.
@item @anchor{filter-veh}
@kbd{veh} - From vehicle id's to vehicle id's (exclude both) data. Two integer parameters, one booloean: vehicle id. 1st and 2nd not nulled. 
				If parameter == -1, it means less than least or great than greatest. Can has 3rd validity parameter, default @b{true}. See examples below.
@example
	$ select.full().all().veh( 119, 251);
@end example	
shows vehicles in account with id from 120 to 250 and valid LAT/LON.
@example
	$ select.full().all().veh( -1, 251, false);
@end example	
shows vehicles in account with id 250 and less and invalid LAT/LON.

Zero value instead -1 permits, of course, but HQN use unsigned ids and 0 will considered as value and built double sided request ( 0 < x < greatest) 
whereas -1 built one sided ( x < greatest for ex).

@item @anchor{filter-sqz}
@kbd{sqz} - Vehicles inside/outside squared geozone. Nine parameters. Eight notnullable double: left up LAT, left up LON, right up LAT/LON, right down LAT/LON, left down LAT/LON, 
and nullable boolean, true (@b{default}) - inside, false - outside.  W and S are negative.

@item @anchor{filter-rndz}
@kbd{rndz} - Vehicles inside/outside round geozone. Three parameters. Two notnullable double: center LAT, left up LON, size (meters) > 0 
and nullable boolean, true (@b{default}) - inside, false - outside.  W and S are negative.
@example
	$ select.full().all().rndz( 25.045965, -77.375742, 25100, false);
@end example	
shows all vehicles outside 25 km and 100 meters from Tonique Williams-darling HWy and Sir Milo Butler Hwy circle, Nassau, Bahamas.

@example
	$ select.full().all().sqz(25.147931, -77.610242, 25.152660, -77.205678, 24.945919, -77.141456, 24.940872, -77.622238 );
@end example	
shows all vehicles inside New Providence island, Bahamas.

@end enumerate

@c --------------------------------------------
@node Order
@c ................
@section Order
@cindex chapter, first
Term @kbd{'order'} - it's command extention means things filter according @kbd{'filter'} has to do. There're @kbd{'order'}'s:
@enumerate
@item @anchor{order-asc}
@kbd{asc} - @b{Default}. Ascending by receive time
@item @anchor{order-asc_u}
@kbd{asc_u} - Ascending by unit event time
@item @anchor{order-asc_v}
@kbd{asc_v} - Ascending by vehicle id
@item @anchor{order-desc}
@kbd{desc} - Descending by receive time
@item @anchor{order-desc_u}
@kbd{desc_u} - Descending by unit event time
@item @anchor{order-desc_v}
@kbd{desc_v} - Descending by vehicle id
@end enumerate

@example
	$ select.full().all().veh( -1, 251, false).asc_u();
@end example	
shows vehicles in account with id 250 and less and invalid LAT/LON ordered by unit event time asc.


@c --------------------------------------------
@node Format
@c ................
@section Format
@cindex Format
Term @kbd{'format'} - it's command extention means things filter according @kbd{'order'} has to do. Each can has encoding string parameter, default "utf-8".
There're @kbd{'format'}'s:
@enumerate

@item @anchor{format-table}
@kbd{table} - @b{Default}. One-header table.
@item @anchor{format-json}
@kbd{json} - Json
@item @anchor{format-csv}
@kbd{csv} - CSV

@end enumerate

@example
	$ select.full().all().veh( -1, 251, false).asc().json("CP1252");
@end example	

@c --------------------------------------------
@node Params
@c ................
@section Params
@cindex Params
Params

@c =============================================================
@node Index
@unnumbered Index


@printindex cp

@bye


